CHAPTER I

BEGINNING THE VOYAGE


_August 28th._--Events follow each other so fast that they get confused
in the memory.

The return from the club in the morning, a frightened wife with a
telegram, the rush from Petersburg to Cronstadt, hurried calls,
appointment to the _Suvaroff_, good-byes, send-offs, a new service,
etc., etc.

I am not yet accustomed to my new surroundings.

To-day I bade good-bye to the captain and officers of the _Borodino_,
and to the foremen and workmen. They wished me good luck, drank my
health, cheered, and the band played. They evidently had a very
friendly disposition towards me.

The parting with the foremen and workmen was cordial. It was very sad
to see their doleful faces. They all cried before the end of their
farewell speeches. I kissed all and thanked them. They blessed me
with the ikon of St. Nicholas. I promised to give them my photograph
as a memento. I had nothing else to repay them with. I could think of
nothing better.

_August 30th._--Yesterday we left Cronstadt. The Emperor overtook the
fleet in the _Alexandria_, and steamed round it. All the time bands
were playing, the men cheered, the fleet saluted. It was a superb
sight. At times the smoke from the guns was so thick that the nearest
ships were not visible. To-day we arrived at Revel at 7 a.m. It is said
we are to remain here for nearly a month.

To-day is the _Suvaroff's_ name-day. There was mass. No festivities.

8 p.m.--Such a worry. Nowhere can I find room for myself. When I was
working on board the _Borodino_, as you may imagine, I constantly
consoled myself with the thought of rest and of leave. The _Borodino_
is completed. I might now have been free, might now have been living
at home with my wife. But ah! fate! It seems to me that I shall not
return. My predecessor in this cabin that I occupy went mad and was
retired. This may be superstition, but it is nevertheless unpleasant.
It is said that to-day the captain of the _Asia_ momentarily lost his
head and steered his ship to ram the _Apraxin_; the presence of mind of
the officer of the watch saved the _Asia_ and _Apraxin_ from damage.

_October 3rd._--At sea, on the way to the island of Bornholm. Time
flies. Daily there are new impressions, worries, gossip, and work. On
the eve of our departure from Libau there was prayer, with genuflexions
for "Boyarin Zenovie."[1]

Yesterday we had vespers, and to-day mass. Everything so triumphant
and showy! The weather was glorious. At lunch the band played.
Suddenly it was reported that the torpedo-boat _Buistry_ (Rapid) had
rammed the _Oslyabya_--had knocked a hole in herself and damaged her
torpedo-tubes. The _Buistry_ approached the _Suvaroff_. With the
help of a megaphone (_i.e._ a large speaking-trumpet) the admiral
conversed with her. They managed to plug the holes. It will be my work
to mend them. We shall anchor off Bornholm, where I hope to repair
the torpedo-boat. To-night there will be danger. We shall all sleep
in our clothes and all guns will be loaded. We shall pass through a
narrow strait. We are afraid of striking on Japanese mines in these
waters. Perhaps there will be no mines; but considering that long ago
Japanese officers went to Sweden and, it is said, swore to destroy
our fleet, we must be on our guard. This strait is eminently suitable
for torpedo-boat attacks or for laying down mines. When you get this
letter we shall have passed the dangerous place, and it is no use your
worrying yourself about it.

Have things gone badly with Kuropatkin again? How serious it is! Will
there ever be an end to our reverses?

4 p.m.--We have passed the island of Bornholm without stopping. The
southern shores of Sweden were visible. On the way we met a good many
steamers. We are steaming with the greatest precaution. The fleet is
split into several divisions, steaming at a certain distance from
one another. Each division is surrounded by torpedo-boats. Whenever
a steamer or sailing-ship is observed on our course or coming toward
us, a torpedo-boat goes ahead and clears the way--that is, drives them
aside.

It is a pretty sight--a torpedo-boat going full speed gliding swiftly
over the sea like a snake. Being low in the water, it can scarcely be
seen from afar.

_October 4th._--At anchor off the coast of Denmark, opposite the island
of Langeland (Longland). On board the transport _Kamchatka_.

Ah me, what a day it has been! We had scarcely arrived at Langeland
when I went on board the torpedo-boat _Buistry_, not having even drunk
my coffee. I put on high boots and took my mackintosh. The _Buistry_
approached the _Kamchatka_ and the work began. I got as black as the
devil in the bunker. I must have new overalls. I shall buy some cloth
somewhere and give it to a sailor to make.

High boots are invaluable, but it is a pity they do not come above the
knee, as I sometimes have to crawl and spoil my trousers, just as I did
to-day. The work in the _Buistry_ is tremendous. The wind freshened.
The torpedo-boat rolled. We should have worked outboard, but there was
too much sea on; she rolled her deck under. The artificers will work
all night at the inside, and perhaps to-morrow they may be able to
do outside repairs. Towards the evening it blew so hard that it was
useless thinking of getting on board the _Suvaroff_. It is very cramped
in the torpedo-boat, and she is still rolling very heavily. I went
over to the _Kamchatka_. I do not yet know if I shall get a cabin to
sleep in. I brought very few cigarettes with me. Here, off Langeland,
are a Danish cruiser and a torpedo-boat guarding our anchorage from
the Japanese, who might fire a torpedo at us. There are Danish pilots
in each ship, as well as in the torpedo-boats. Once we are out of the
Baltic, the danger from mines will be passed.

I am sitting in the wardroom of the _Kamchatka_, where I have found
some paper on which I am scribbling. If the weather does not abate
I shall have to stay in the _Kamchatka_ until we reach the next
anchorage. They have just come to report that there are no spare
hammocks. I shall have to spend the night on a sofa in the wardroom,
without undressing. Well, that is no hardship!

I shall sleep somehow, as I am very tired.

_October 15th_, 12 noon.--At 9 a.m. I went from the _Buistry_ to the
_Suvaroff_. Find the consul is just leaving. I fastened my letter No. 3
somehow, unsigned, and gave it to the consul without a stamp. I think
it will reach you.

At eleven o'clock I went to lunch with the admiral, who conferred on me
the Order of St. Anne. This came as a surprise to me. The order with
the ribbon was sent to me. The admiral is promoted to vice-admiral and
aide-de-camp to the Czar.

3 p.m.--I lay down hoping to rest, but it was not to be; I had to go
to the _Sissoi_--her davits had broken. They could not lower a single
cutter. Off I went. Here we are at our first anchorage, and already
there are a heap of damages. The _Buistry_ is damaged; there are
breakages in the _Sissoi_: in the _Jemchug_ the davits broke and a
cutter sank.

Three Danish steamers which coaled us are damaged. The owners assess
the damages at 6,000 roubles (£600). I shall have to go and look at
them.

I do not take into account minor mishaps, such as the torpedo-boat
_Prozorlivy_ (Clearsighted), which struck her bows somewhere, and of
course bent them. She was, however, able to cope with the leak herself.

_October 6th._--On the way to Cape Skaw.

Another mishap to the _Orel_ (Eagle).[2] At a most critical moment,
when we were going through a narrow strait, her rudder was injured. She
anchored. The damage is not yet ascertained. There is probably some
scoundrel on board who has been trying all along to injure the ship.
It is supposed to be one of the crew. We got up anchor at 7 a.m. The
weather is fair, but it appears to be freshening. The wind is beginning
to get much stronger, although the sun is still shining, and there is
not much sea.

It is warm here, 12° to 13° R.

The _Orel_ weighed anchor and followed the fleet.

_October 7th._--We are not yet up to the Skaw. Shall be there soon. The
weather is very fine again. I wonder what it will be like in the German
Ocean. We have to put our watches back now.

It is 8.30 on board at this moment. In Petersburg it is probably not
yet 8 o'clock.

I occasionally look at a book, _The English Self-teacher_, but I do not
get on with it; sometimes I am lazy, and sometimes people interrupt me.

At anchor off the Skaw. There is no communication with the shore except
through the pilot. I gave my letter No. 4 to him to post. Sending a
telegram is out of the question. At present we have stopped at sea, and
are not off a port. We were anxious about the _Orel_ all night. As I
have already told you, she left the fleet, no longer answered signals,
and found herself in a dangerous place. Now she is anchored with the
other ships.

I write to you so often now, that when it will be difficult to send
letters, and they will take a long time reaching you, you are bound to
be anxious. In any case, I warn you of this. Of course, I shall write
to you as often as possible. I must finish this letter. The post goes
very soon in the _Ermak_.

The next trip will be of some days' duration. We have no news of the
war. It is very trying. The torpedo-boat _Prozorlivy_ has damaged her
condenser, and is being sent to Libau. The _Jemchug_ lost a cutter and
broke the davits. The davits were taken down to-day and sent to the
_Kamchatka_, where, in hoisting them on board, they fell into the water
and sank.

How strict discipline is now! A signal was made to the _Ermak_. She did
not answer, so they began firing projectiles under her stern. After
such a reminder she quickly responded.

At three o'clock a Swedish steamer approached the fleet, flying a
signal that she had very important dispatches. Apparently the Russian
agent reported that a very suspicious three-masted sailing ship had
sailed from the fiords. An order has now been given to train all guns
on every passing vessel. We met ships hitherto, but the torpedo-boats
always drove them out of the way. We have already passed the most
dangerous spots. Half an hour ago it was reported to the admiral that
either the _Navarin_ or the _Nachimoff_ (I do not remember which) had
signalled that they had seen two balloons. What can this be? Can it be
the Japanese?

8 p.m.--Panic prevails on board. Every one examines the sea intently.
The weather is glorious. It is warm. There is moonlight. The slightest
suspicious-looking spot in the water is carefully watched. The guns are
loaded. The crew are standing about on deck. One half will sleep at
their guns without undressing; the other half and officers will keep
watch to-night. It is curious that we are so far from the theatre of
war and yet so much alarmed. The crew treat the matter seriously.

By the way, I will tell you the following incident. A sailor of the
Revel half "equipage" asked to be allowed to go to the war in one of
the ships. His request was refused. He thereupon climbed into the hold
of one of the transports and remained there until now. Imagine how many
days he passed in the fetid hold of the transport! Besides that, he
would be suspected of being a deserter--that is, to have committed a
severely punishable offence. No doubt they will inform Revel and keep
him in the fleet. A curious incident, is it not? I wish the whole thing
were over. Every one's nerves are strained just now. There are some
officers in the fleet who have returned from Port Arthur, and they say
that people out there are not nearly as nervous as they are in Russia.

The following details will show you how accustomed they have grown to
the position. The crews of the ships at Port Arthur asked leave to go
to the advanced positions, and returned under the influence of liquor.
No one could understand how they became drunk. In the town liquors
were not sold, and yet men went to the advanced positions and returned
intoxicated. At last it was discovered, and how do you suppose? It
appears that the sailors went to the front in order to kill one of the
enemy and take away his brandy-flask. Just imagine such a thing. They
risked their lives to get drunk! They did all this without thinking
anything of it, and contrived to conceal it from the authorities.

_October 8th._--The German Ocean (North Sea).

What a night it has been--nerve-racking and restless. Early in the
evening all were in a state of nervous tension and panic. News was
received at midnight from the foremost ships that they had observed
four suspicious torpedo-boats without lights. Vigilance was redoubled,
but thank God the night passed happily. At present there is a fog.
Nothing is visible all around. The sirens which you dislike so much are
shrieking. I went to bed, dressed, last night, and did not cover myself
with the counterpane, but just threw my overalls over me. In the night
I froze, so covered my feet with a rug. The rug was very useful--many
thanks to you for it.

We are now in the German Ocean. They say it will be rough. At present
it is calm, but foggy. We go from the Skaw to Brest, in France. There,
there will be no communication with the shore, it is said. It will be
strange if we arrive in the East without having once set foot on dry
land--and that seems likely to happen; circumnavigating the world and
not seeing a single town--how that would please you!

9 p.m.--A signal has just been received (by wireless telegraphy)
that the _Kamchatka_, which had dropped far astern, was attacked by
torpedo-boats. Just off to find out details.

10 p.m.--The _Kamchatka_ reports that she is attacked on all sides by
eight torpedo-boats.

_October 9th._--Night of October 9th.

The _Kamchatka_ is asking the position of the fleet. She says she has
altered course and that the torpedo-boats have gone. On board us they
think that the Japanese are asking the position of the fleet. The wind
has freshened. The _Suvaroff_ is rolling. If it continues to freshen,
the torpedo-boats will be obliged to give up following and make for the
nearest shore.

My God! what will the fleet do then?

About 1 a.m. they sounded off quarters, having seen ships ahead. They
let the ships get nearer, and then there began....

What it was words fail to describe! All the ships of our division were
ablaze. The noise of the firing was incessant. The searchlights were
turned on. I was on the after bridge, and was positively blinded and
deafened by the firing. I put my hands to my ears and bolted below. The
rest I watched from the spar-deck, out of the accommodation-ladder port.

A small steamer was rolling helplessly on the sea. One funnel, a
bridge, and the red and black paint on her side were clearly visible.
I saw no one on deck--they had probably hidden themselves below in
terror. First one, then another projectile from our ship struck this
unfortunate steamer. I saw there was an explosion. The order to cease
firing was given, but the other ships continued to fire and no doubt
sank the steamer. A second and third steamer not having any one on deck
rolled helplessly in the same fashion. The _Suvaroff_ did not fire on
them.

Imagine the feelings of the people in these ships! They were, no
doubt, fishermen. Now there will be a universal scandal. As a matter
of fact they are to blame themselves. They must have known our fleet
was coming, and they must have known the Japanese wished to destroy it.
They saw the fleet. Why did they not cut adrift their nets, if they had
them out, and get out of the way? The nets could be paid for afterwards.

We shall find out at Brest what we have done. If it was not the
_Kamchatka_, but the Japanese, who asked the position of the fleet,
they will now know where we are to be found. If that is the case, we
must expect to be attacked to-night. The moon is shining now, but from
4 to 6 a.m. it will be dark--the time most suitable for attack. If only
we could get to the open sea! We shall be perfectly safe there from
these accidents. I do not know whether to go to bed or not. You know
I always like sharing even the smallest events with you and telling
you of them. Take care of my letters; they are better than any diary.
Perhaps some day I will read them myself and refresh my memory about
our present excitements.

2.30 a.m.--What a misfortune! A signal has come from the _Aurora_,
"Four underwater shot-holes, funnels torn, the chaplain severely
wounded, and a captain of a gun slightly."

Our division fired on the _Aurora_. She and the _Dimitry Donskoi_ were
detached (we are in six divisions). At the time of the firing on the
steamers the men lost their heads. Probably some one took her to be
Japanese and fired on her with the six-inch guns; she was very far off.
A very, very sad occurrence. The only consolation is that our shooting
is so good.

3.30 p.m.--The second and third steamers about which I wrote last night
suffered a little as well. The _Aurora's_ chaplain had his hand torn
off. They asked permission to call at the nearest port in order to send
him to hospital. The admiral refused. Six different projectiles struck
the _Aurora_, whose side and funnels were pierced. Comparatively few
were injured. The _Aurora_ is to blame for having shown herself on the
horizon, on the side away from us. She turned her searchlight on us,
and by so doing made us take her to be one of the enemy's ships.

Yesterday, or more correctly this morning, I went to bed at six
o'clock. Again I did not undress. I slept by snatches, on and off all
day. Perhaps there will be no sleep again to-night.

The barber has just cut my hair. He uses huge tailor's scissors with
cloth-covered handles. "I did not succeed in buying a proper pair," he
explained, when he saw me looking at his ditty box.[3] He cut it very
evenly for a self-taught barber.

Whom have we not among the sailors?--tailors, bootmakers, locksmiths,
cooks, bakers, barbers, photographers, confectioners, cigarette makers,
etc. All trades are represented, and there is work for all of them in a
battleship. The captain wanted to be shaved, so he sent an orderly for
a barber. The man arrived (not the one who cut my hair) and the shaving
began. The barber's hand shook and the captain's face grew red with
blood. He had nearly taken off half his cheek. A fearful row ensued.
The captain, with soapy cheeks, smacked the heads of the orderly and
barber. The latter tried to excuse himself by saying that he is still
learning. A pretty picture, is it not? Now the captain shaves himself,
not trusting local talent.

11 p.m.--An eventful day has gone by! At six o'clock some fishing-nets
fouled the screws, but the engines are working. The fishermen in these
parts tow very long nets, and you have to pass over them.

We had vespers to-day. How will this night pass? The weather remains
fine. It is calm. The moon will shine until four o'clock. Perhaps
another fog will come on like last night. All this morning the sirens
were screeching in the fog. We shall be at the entrance of the English
Channel in the morning. Again they have not served out hammocks to the
crew. They will sleep at their guns fully dressed.

_October 10th_ (7 p.m.).--In the English Channel, between England and
France.

I have not written to you the whole day, and it is getting on my
conscience.

We had mass in the morning, and then lunch. Not having slept all night,
I lay down to rest. I slept until 3.30. I worked and then dined. I am
only just free. The night passed quietly. It is raining now, and the
ship is gently heaving on the ocean swell. If nothing further occurs,
we shall be at Brest to-morrow. Passing by England this morning I saw
her southern shores, which were faintly visible in the mist. Yes,
there was "Foggy Albion." Involuntarily I pondered over this clod of
earth--so powerful, so rich, so proud, and so ill-disposed towards us.
We are only three hours' journey from London and six by rail from Paris.

Many varieties of birds settle on the ship, tired and exhausted by
their long flight. The crew feed them and let them go.

I am depressed--fearfully depressed. Anxiety presses on my soul! What
would I not give to be with you now! Again I have not slept all night.
How tiring it all is!

_October 11th._--They say it is very possible we shall not call at
Brest. Profiting by the fine weather, we shall steer straight across
the Bay of Biscay. The bay enjoys a bad reputation. It is seldom
crossed in calm weather. It blows there very heavily. So far we have
had a very fair voyage.

The _Korea_, which apparently called at Cherbourg, signals that she has
heard nothing of the fleet having fired on steamers. The torpedo-boat
_Bravy_ has broken something.

Bay of Biscay.

Fate herself prevented our going to Brest, and steered us straight
across the Bay of Biscay to Vigo (Spain).

Such a thick fog came up at 1 p.m. that the ship astern was not
visible. We are steaming through milk! The sirens are shrieking in
turn, one ship after another.

The following ships are in our division: first the _Suvaroff_, next
the _Alexander III._, then the _Borodino_, _Orel_, and the transport
_Anadir_.

Perhaps it is just as well we did not go to Brest. The entrance to the
port is very difficult, dangerous, and impossible in a fog.

If we do not go to Crete, from Vigo onwards the way before us is
wide--the whole ocean!

Lying on my bed last night I watched the rats making themselves at home
in my cabin. I used to sleep with my feet towards the door, but have
now put my pillow there, because of the rats. They can jump from the
writing-table on to the settee, and could easily have jumped on my head.

Since we left the port of Alexander III. at Libau, a fortnight ago,
no telegrams have been sent, except those allowed by the admiral.
This was done so that spies should not warn the Japanese, waiting for
us in the Baltic. The Japanese evidently thought (report said there
were more than a hundred of them in the Baltic) that we should wait
for the _Oleg_ at Libau. The admiral, however, did not wait for the
_Oleg_, and left. Their spies did not succeed in warning them. Though
telegrams were received at the office, they were not sent on for two
days. Perhaps this accounts for their inactivity.

Evening.--The fog dispersed and our division reassembled. The crew will
sleep at their guns without undressing till we reach Vigo.

I sit in my cabin and try to distract my thoughts. Such gloom
overwhelms me that I feel inclined to hang myself. I go into the
wardroom, take a hand at dominoes, play with the dogs, or idle about,
not knowing what to do with myself.

There are three dogs who are always to be found in the wardroom of the
_Suvaroff_. One is a dachs called "Dinky"; the second a fox-terrier
puppy, "Gipsy"; and the third, "Flagmansky," is something like a dachs,
but white-haired and rough. Flagmansky and Gipsy are very amusing
animals. They are often played with and teased; corks and papers are
tied to them with string, and they jump and romp about. Now you know
all our amusements. They are not many!

I go on deck and look at this much-vaunted sea.

Some one has prepared Flagmansky for the tropics by cutting off all
the hair on his body, leaving his head like a lion's. The chaplain is
accused of doing this, but he denies it.

We shall arrive at Vigo either to-night or to-morrow morning. It will
be interesting to know if they will allow us to coal from our transport
_Anadir_. Coal is getting scarce in the battleships.

_October 12th._--We are approaching Spain. Lighthouses are already
visible. We shall be at Vigo in the morning. We shall all be much
relieved, as we have not called at a single port since we left Libau.
We could go on to Tangier without stopping. The weather has greatly
facilitated our passage.

Admiral Folkersham, commanding the 2nd division of battleships (in it
are the _Sissoi_, _Oslyabya_, _Navarin_, _Nachimoff_, and another),
distinguished himself when passing through the English Channel. He
approached the English coast and coaled his ships from the transports.
We are all laughing to think of the horror of our Minister for Foreign
Affairs (by the way, all the ministers were opposed to the dispatch of
the fleet, but the admiral insisted on it).

The Minister will be informed of the firing on the steamers. That will
be the first European complication. They will then tell him about the
coaling near England--a second complication. Finally he will learn that
a whole division of our fleet has called at the neutral port of Vigo.

_October 13th._--In Vigo Bay.

No communication with the shore allowed. I gave my letter No. 6, of
thirty-two pages, to be forwarded by the Consulate. Of course, there
were no stamps. I wonder if you will get it!

We shall not remain here more than twenty-four hours. The Spanish
authorities do not allow a longer stay. This place is hot and sunny.
There were 20° R. in the shade. The place is pretty. There are hills
all around. The town is evidently not large.

12 o'clock.--The authorities do not allow us to stop for a moment. In
order to gain time, the admiral asked the local captain of the port to
telegraph to Madrid, to ask that we might stay here five days to make
good defects. In spite of the prohibition we are about to take in coal,
without which our fleet would be checkmated. Sentries will be posted
over the hawsers (ropes which fasten the ships to the colliers), with
orders to allow no one to cast them off. What will be the end of all
this?

A collier lies near each battleship, but they are not allowed to coal.
Telegrams are sent everywhere. They are now waiting for a reply from
Madrid. Will they really not allow us to coal!

The admiral has received a telegram stating that England is in a
ferment--not at our having fired on the steamers, but because the
torpedo-boat which was left on the scene of the drama gave no help
to the sufferers. None of our torpedo-boats were there. They were at
Cherbourg. The admiral replied to this effect to our ambassador in
London.

An answer has been received from Madrid. It announces that the
Government requests us to refrain from coaling, but will inform us
to-morrow how much we may take.

The admiral ordered a signal to be hoisted for the fleet, to be in
readiness to weigh anchor at 7 a.m.

When the admiral went ashore to-day, he was met in state. The crowd
made an ovation, a description of which was in the local evening papers.

_October 14th._--I gave my letter to a soldier or police "alguazil," as
they call them on board. I gave him money--one peseta!

Our battleships lie waiting. It is positively insulting! Coal, bought
by Russia, is in steamers close alongside and is not allowed to be
put on board. "Who prevents it?" you ask. Miserable, beggarly,
broken Spain. Undoubtedly the hand of England is visible in this. The
Spaniards make no secret of it.

At 1 p.m. permission came for each ship to take in 400 tons. Sailors
and officers, dirty and black, hasten to begin coaling. White tunics
and cap-covers are nowhere to be seen. Everything is black with
coal-dust. Faces are black as soot, and only teeth gleam white.

_October 18th._--They say we leave for Tangier to-morrow morning. I
have been busy all day, and not able to write.
